---
template: BlogPost
path: /2020/03/22/coercion-js-equality
date: 2020-03-22T15:14:36.571Z
title: The JavaScript comparison table - All about `==` operator
subtitle: Conquering Type Coercion in JavaScript. Period.
avatar: /img/avatars/avatar-js.png
gist: >-
categories:
    - JavaScript
    - Questions
tag:
    - JavaScript
    - Code
    - Web
draft: false
---

<!-- But First,
Head to [JavaScript Equality game](https://eqeq.js.org/) and try to solve the classic minesweeper + JavaScript double equality game. Cheers! -->

### What are we talking about?

JavaScript has two similar, yet different, ways to compare data types. You can either test equality with `==` or `===.`

`Triple Equals`
When using triple equals `===` in JavaScript, we test for both the type and the value we are comparing have to be the same. It is also called a "strict equality" or "identity" or "triple equals".

```js
42 === 42; // true
42 === "42"; //false
```

`Double equals`
When using double equals in JavaScript we test value after type coercion (if required) for both values under comparison. Double equals thus also performs type coercion, if required.
It is also called "Abstract Equality Comparison" or "loose equality" or "double equals".

```js
1991 == "1991"; // true
false == 0; //true
```

Type coercion means that two values are compared only after attempting to convert them into a common type.

Moral of the story is,

> Always use triple equality unless you are sure about types of values being compared.

The following section talks about behavior of double equality , how type coercion works in general and how can you [deduce equality table](https://dorey.github.io/JavaScript-Equality-Table/) by yourself.

### Rules

---

#### Rule #1

1 .Use truthy values
`truthy` value is a value that is considered true in a Boolean context. All values are truthy unless they are defined as `falsy` (i.e., except for false, 0, -0, 0n, "", null, undefined, and NaN).

#### Rule #2

2 .Use ToPrimitive Conversion
Based on values of comparison, type coercion occurs, let's consider a internal function to convert so,

    ToPrimitive(input, PreferredType?)

The optional parameter PreferredType indicates the final type of the conversion: it is either Number or String, depending on whether the result of `ToPrimitive()` will be converted to a number or a string.

Conversion happens in following order,

1.  If input is primitive type, return it
2.  If input is an object. Call `input.valueOf()`. If the result is primitive, return it.
3.  Else, call `input.toString()`. If the result is primitive, return it.
4.  throw a `TypeError` (indicating the failure to convert input to a primitive).

If PreferredType is Number, the above algorithm works in specified order.
If PreferredType is String, steps 2 and 3 are swapped.
The PreferredType can also be omitted; it is then considered to be String for dates and Number for all other values.
The default implementation of `valueOf()` returns `this`, while the default implementation of `toString()` returns type information.

This is how the operators + and == call `ToPrimitive()`.

---

Head to [JavaScript Equality game](https://eqeq.js.org/) to apply these rules and check your table [here](https://dorey.github.io/JavaScript-Equality-Table/).

Cheers!

Step by step solution coming soon...

<!--
### Explain board and symetry

### Bonus toString and valueOf -->
<!-- ### Reference
- [JavaScript Equality game](https://eqeq.js.org/)
- [Equality in JavaScript](https://dorey.github.io/JavaScript-Equality-Table/) -->
